# Cognition and Neuroscience

Cognitive neuroscience is an interdisciplinary scientific discipline which studies the neural processes underlying cognition.
It combines Neuroscience (science of the neuron and the structure of the brain) and Cognitive science (science of cognition) as it tries to understand the relation between the structure of the brain and its function.

An historical perspective:
- The first to claim that the mind was localized in the brain was Galenus (129-210 AC) but thought that personality and emotion were generated by other organs.
- Andreas Vesalius (1514-1564) did believe that the brain and the nervous system are the centre of the mind and emotion.
- Rene' Descartes (1596-1650, also known as Cartesio)  believed in the sharp distinction between the physical and the mental. He recognized that the brain has a key role for sensory input and motor output, but this did not make it the basis of mind. Descartes also made a distinction between what would now be called “bottom-up” (from the body) and “top-down” (from the soul) processes. The passions such as joy and anger agitate and disturb the mind.
- Gottfried Leibniz (1646-1716) proposed that the mind and the body are separated substances but constructed from the outset to run together in perfect harmony.
- **Offray de la Mettrie** (1709-1751) **believed that matter (the phisical components) is fundamental and is the cause of mental events.** Voluntary (cognitive) processes result simply from more complex mechanisms than involuntary and instinctive processes. This is in essence the believe held by many of us who are currently working in the field of cognitive neuroscience
- Franz Joseph Gall (1758-1828) divided the brain into sections that corresponded to certain behaviors and traits that he called fundamental
faculties. This is referred to as localization of function. Gall developed the theory of Organology and the method of Cranioscopy that would later be known as Phrenology. Phrenology was later disproved by Pierre Flourens (1794-1867).
- John H Jackson(1835-1911) produced the first scientific demonstration of localization of function
- **Gustav Fechner** (1801-1887) was a key figure in the development of psychophysics (what we still use today). He believed that mind and body were two aspects of a single entity and that mental processes could be measured. **Fechner succeeded in showing that the mental could be measured and was closely linked to the physical.**
- William James (1842-1910) pointed out that mental processes can be abolished by brain injuries or altered by drugs, therefore Physiology is needed to understand Psychology. Introduced “psychophysics” as the study of the relation between physical stimuli and reportable sensations.
- Emil du Bois-Reymond (1848) demonstrated the electrical basis of nerve impulse
- **Santiago Ramon y Cajal** (c.1890) **theorized the neuron, a discrete cell which is the primary computation unit of the nervous system.**
- **The first serious attempts to localize mental functions to specific locations in the brain was by Paul Broca** (1824-1880) **and Carl Wernicke** (1848-1905) by studying the effects of injuries to different parts of the brain on psychological functions.

Neuropsychology relies on the
logic that one way to understand
the workings of a system is to
systematically remove (or
inactivate) parts of it and
observe how the removal of
each part affects the system’s
functioning.

Dogma of the ghost in the machine: *thinking that mind and brain are separate (ED I'm not sure I understood that correctly)*. Talking about mind as an entity that does things is a category mistake turning it into something it is not. Mental activities are processes, properties of people.

20th century brain mapping technology, such as functional magnetic
resonance imaging (fMRI) and Positron Emission Tomography
(PET), allowed researchers to investigate experimental
strategies of cognitive psychology by observing brain function. 

"Cognitive Neuroscience" first coined in 1976 by psychologists Michael Gazzaniga (1939- ) and George Armitage Miller (1920–2012).
