# Adaptation and Genetic Algorithms

Genetic algorithms have been pioneered by John Holland in 70's, but became popular only in the late of 80's. They are based on ideas from "Evolution by Natural Selection" and can be used to solve a variety of problems that are not easy to solve using traditional techniques.

If we have a problem that we don't know how to solve algorithmically, then we can use a computer to "find" a solution by simply generating random feasible solutions and test them until we have found a solution "good enough".

## Naïve Genetic Algorithm

Sometimes we can actually use this actually idea, but in most cases there are to many possible solutions. A better idea is to generate a set of random solutions, then we repeatedly test each solution in the set and rank them, remove some bad solutions from set, duplicate some good solutions and make small changes to some of them; until we have a solution that is "good enough".

In Genetic Algorithms solutions are often encoded as fixed-length bit strings. While the generation of a score for each solution is based on a function that measures how "good" a solution is and that is called _**fitness function**_. Each possible genotype is a point in the search space of the fitness function.

The nature of the search space will determine how a genetic algorithm will perform. A "random" search space, for example, leads to poor performances. Another problem is that GAs can get stuck in local maxima.

## Adding sex - Crossover

Although it may work for simple search spaces, the previous algorithm is still very naïve. It relies on random mutations and _asexual reproduction_ to find a good solution, but we know that in nature _**sexual preproduction**_ leads to healthier populations.

So we can translate this observation from nature to our algorithm. We take two high scoring _parent_ bit strings (chromosomes) and _combine_ them with some probability (**crossover rate**) producing two new offsprings. Each offspring may then be changed randomly (mutation).

Many schemes are possible for guaranteeing that individuals with better scoring chromosomes are more likely to be selected, the most used is the _**Roulette Wheel**_.

It consists in constructing a wheel with a number of wedges equal to the number of chromosomes. The width of each wedge is proportional to the score of the corresponding chromosome. We mark the summation of the wedge widths starting from 1, then we generate a uniform number between 1 and the maximum summation value and we select the chromosome that "covers" the random value as parent.
