# 8. Network Science: Graph Theory

Graph theory is a branch of mathematics for the study of discrete structures called **_graphs_** for modelling pairwise relations between objects.

I will skip graph's terminology, notation and basics, but it is present on professor's slides

## Clustering coefficient

Clustering is a measure of how "bunched up" the edges of a graph are. Formally, the **_clustering coefficient_ of a node** _A_ is defined as the probability that two randomly selected _friends_ of _A_ are friends themselves.
The clustering coefficient of a node is defined only if _A_ hss at least two friends and it is always a value between 0 and 1.

The **clustering coefficient (_CC_) of a graph** _G_ is the average of the clustering coefficients of all nodes in _G_. It quantifies the likelihood that nodes that share a common neighbor are neighbors themselves. It can be intended also as the proportion of all possible triangles that are actually closed in a graph.

## Edge density

**_Edge density_** _&rho;_ of a graph is the actual number of edges in proportion to the maximum possible number of edges. Clearly it is a number between 0 and 1 and quantifies the probability that two nodes are connected.

If _&rho;_ is small, then the graph is **_sparse_**, otherwise it is **_dense_**

We consider a graph to be **_highly clustered_** if _CC_ >> _&rho;_

## Centrality metrics

For nodes in a graph, **_centrality metrics_** try to formalize notions such as "important", "influential" or "popular". Since different notions of centrality exist, we have different centrality metrics.
 - The **degree centrality** simple say that the greater the degree of a node, the more "important" is the node. Unfortunately, it is not able to capture the notion of _brokerage_ i.e. the ability of a node in a graph to act as a bridge between different components.
 - The **betweenness** of a node _u_ is defined as the fraction of all pairwise shortest paths that go through _u_.
 - The **closeness** is a good metrics when is not important to have many friends or to be in a broker position, but it is important to be in a central position. It is defined as the inverse average shortest path length between a node _u_ and every other node in the graph.
 - The **eigenvector centrality** is based on the idea that the importance of a node is determined by the importance of its neighbors.
